The data underpinning inclusion of ENE in the staging system are derived from histopathological examination of neck dissection specimens in patients treated surgically for their head and neck cancer. The modification is based on analysis of a large National Cancer Data Base (NCDB) data set, including cases with squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck, with the exception of HPV-related oropharynx cancer and nasopharynx cancer (Fig. 6.5). The new N category was then tested for validation on another large collaborative data set from Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, and Princess Margaret Hospital, Toronto, for surgically treated oral cancer patients (Fig. 6.6 and Table 6.3). The lack of ENE data in patients treated by nonsurgical modalities is problematic because currently available radiographic techniques are not sensitive enough to detect microscopic or less than gross ENE. Therefore, only clinically obvious ENE should be used for definition of cN when the patient is treated with nonsurgical therapy. This inability of current technology to reliably identify minimal or microscopic ENE without pathological examination of lymph node dissection specimens was the basis for separate cN and pN approaches for staging the neck. Clinically overt ENE (ENE.) will be designated cN3b irrespective of any other nodal characteristic in patients treated without neck dissection. Histologically identified ENE (ENEmi or ENEma) in a neck dissection specimen will be used in conjunction with node size and laterality for pN: Histopathologically confirmed ENE in a single ipsilateral or contralateral metastatic node 3 cm or smaller in largest dimension upstages the patient to pN2a, while all other nodes with histopathologically detected ENE are categorized pN3b.