Extrinsic muscle infiltration is no longer a staging criterion for T4 designation in oral cavity, because depth of invasion supersedes it and extrinsic muscle invasion is difficult to assess (both clinically and pathologically).
- An additional change is the elimination of the TO category for all oral cavity, skin, larynx, HPV- oropharynx, hypopharynx, and sinus. This change affects cases where a cervical lymph node has metastatic squamous cell carcinoma, but no primary tumor is identified despite thorough history, examination, and available imaging studies. Assigning these cases to a specific head and neck site is not possible. Previous editions of TNM staging included a TO category in each of these disease sites. However, it is seldom used and, if it is, the cancer could not be assigned to a stage group. Therefore, for the 8th Edition, the Expert Panel eliminated the TO category from the head and neck staging systems. A separate staging system for those cases with an involved cervical node without a known primary tumor has been added to the chapter entitled Cervical Node and Unknown Primary of the Head and Neck. These cases should be classified under the TNM rules for a cancer of unknown primary outlined in that chapter.
- The exceptions where TO continues to be used as a T-category are HPV-associated cancer and Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) associated cancers. For HPV-associated cancers identified in a cervical lymph node (defined as p16 positive), the case is staged using the p16 positive oropharynx system, which continues to include a "TO" category. EBV-positive cancers identified in a cervical node with no obvious primary are staged using the EBV-related nasopharynx system, in which the "TO" category is maintained. TO is allowed for salivary gland cancers identified by their unique histology.