#### Definition of Primary Tumor (T): Changes
Throughout the head and neck chapters, the Primary Tumor (T) categories (for size and extent of the primary tumor) are generally similar, with changes in the skin, nasopharynx, and oral cavity chapters. A key change from prior editions of the TNM system is the elimination of the TO category in sites other than nasopharynx and HPV+ oropharynx. Specific changes include the following:
- T categorization for skin cancer recognizes the critical importance of depth of invasion beyond 6 mm and perineural invasion, both of which upstage a lesion to T3.
- In nasopharynx, the previous T4 criteria “masticator space" and "infratemporal fossa" are replaced by a specific description of soft tissue involvement to avoid ambiguity. Adjacent muscle involvement (including medial pterygoid, lateral pterygoid, and prevertebral muscles) is designated as T2.
- The biggest change in T category is for the oral cavity. Depth of invasion (DOI) has been added as a modification to T to enhance the distinction between the superficial or exophytic tumors and those that are more invasive. Clinicians have long recognized the very different biological behaviors between these types of lesions, and this is now acknowledged by increasing the T category for every 5-mm increase in DOI in three categories: less than or equal to 5 mm; greater than 5 mm, but not greater than 10mm; and greater than 10mm). It is important to recognize the distinction between tumor thickness and true DOI.