A common pitfall of PET/CT that is particularly pertinent to the evaluation of HPV-related SCCa is the absence of elevated fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in cystic nodes. For this reason, it is imperative that the CT component of the staging examination be carefully evaluated for cystic (low-density) nodes, which have too little solid tissue to demonstrate elevated FDG activity. With this in mind, PET/CT for head and neck malignancies are best performed with contrast-enhanced CT portions of the examination and preferably with dedicated smaller field of view (FOV) neck images. When iodinated contrast is not employed for PET/CT, it also is difficult to evaluate for specific sites of disease involvement, which might upstage a tumor. For example, determining the presence of medial or lateral pterygoid muscle involvement (both T4) by a tonsillar carcinoma is difficult when relying on noncontrast large FOV CT for correlation with FDG-PET uptake.

Some subtleties of tumor involvement for staging also require clarification. The palatoglossus muscle forms the muscle bulk of the anterior tonsillar pillar and may be invaded with even a relatively small tonsillar or tonsillar pillar tumor. Although palatoglossus is defined as an extrinsic muscle of the tongue, involvement of this muscle within the oropharynx does not denote a significantly poorer prognosis for the patient and does not change the T category. A final imaging pitfall for consideration is during the imaging evaluation of a carcinoma of unknown primary (CUP). Most often, the small primary tumor is determined to be in the ipsilateral pharyngeal or lingual tonsil, but particularly with HPV-related tumors, it can be subtle and readily overlooked. It is important to evaluate carefully the CT or MR imaging for asymmetric size of ipsilateral tonsillar tissue and for heterogeneous tonsillar enhancement. PET/CT is an alternate modality if the lesion is not found on CT or MR images, and is best performed prior to oropharyngeal biopsies to avoid a false-positive FDG uptake.

PET/MR imaging is an emerging modality; currently, there are few sites where these scanners are available for clinical imaging. MR images of the primary tumor and nodes and measurements of FDG activity are obtained simultaneously, resulting in fused PET/MR images. There presently is little literature on PET/MR imaging for head and neck tumors and none yet demonstrating increased accuracy of PET/MR imaging over PET/CT for the staging, followup, or surveillance of head and neck tumors. There is reduced ionizing radiation to the patient with PET/MR imaging as compared to PET/CT.