The subsite of the oropharynx should be clarified (palatine/lingual tonsil, tonsillar pillar, posterior pharyngeal wall, soft palate). The size of the primary tumor should be measured along its longest diameter to determine whether this is T1(≤2 cm), T2 (>2 cm and ≤4 cm) or T3 (>4 cm). It may be difficult to be certain by imaging whether a base-of-tongue tumor is extending along the mucosal surface of the lingual aspect of the epiglottis (also T3) or whether the exophytic tumor is abutting against this surface. In these situations, clarification by direct clinical observation is essential. T4 disease is determined by invasion (1) anteriorly to the extrin-sic muscles of the tongue in the floor of the mouth or from the soft palate anteriorly to the hard palate, (2) laterally into the pterygoid muscles or mandible, (3) inferiorly to the larynx, or (4) superiorly to the skull base or beyond. Skull base involvement also necessitates careful evaluation for perineural and intracranial spread of the tumor. Description of the extent of invasion of these specific structures with T4 tumors is important for radiation planning and should be clearly articulated in the report.

CT and MR imaging afford some view of the lungs for metastases, albeit with only a small volume of the lungs being imaged and with low sensitivity for MR imaging. A complete staging report includes evaluation of the lung apices for potential metastases and of the bones of the skull and cervical spine for metastatic disease. PET/CT allows more accurate and complete evaluation for distant metastatic disease, which is most often to the lung, bone, and liver with HPV-related squamous cell carcinoma (SCCa).

Specific pitfalls in imaging relate to the imaging modality being used or to strict interpretation of the definitions of tumor involvement. Detection of metastatic involvement of nodes with either CT or MR imaging requires careful evaluation of multiple morphological features: size, shape, density (intensity on MR imaging), necrosis, and extranodal extension of tumor. It is important to review all criteria and not merely the size of a lymph node. This also should be performed in conjunction with knowledge of the expected drainage pattern of the tumor. As stated previously, oropharyngeal tumors most often drain to the upper- and midjugular nodes (levels II and III, respectively), and bilateral drainage is frequent. These nodal sites should be scrutinized carefully for abnormal shape, size, contour, and texture. The retropharyngeal nodes (RPN) also should be evaluated, particularly when a posterior pharyngeal wall tumor is present. Keep in mind that unless cystic or necrotic, RPN frequently appear isodense to the adjacent prevertebral muscles on CT, making them readily overlooked.