Standard nomenclature is unsatisfactory in describing HPV-mediated p16+ oropharyngeal cancers. The descriptor of "poorly differentiated," which is based on a high nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio, is at odds with the known improved prognosis. Therefore, tumor classification as "poorly differentiated oropharyngeal carcinoma" should be avoided. "Basaloid squamous carcinoma" nosology implies palisading tumor cells, basement membrane deposition, and cribriform-like morphology, which also is not the typical phenotype of HPV-mediated p16+ oropharyngeal cancer. The terminology of "oropharyngeal squamous carcinoma, nonkeratinzing-type" is recommended, acknowledging that "nonkeratinizing" is a low-power descriptor. Observation at higher power confirms that individual cell keratinization and tumor maturation is quite common and compatible with the "nonkeratinizing" descriptor. Grading is not relevant in this context.

The histopathology of HPV-mediated p16+ oropharyngeal cancers is characteristic and easily recognizable. The carcinoma may form nests, islands, or ribbons of tumor cells with either limited cytoplasm ("basaloid"), moderate amount of cytoplasm (epithelioid), or individual cell keratinization. If a ribbon-like pattern is present (transitional pattern), then tumor maturation and flattened keratinizing cells are seen. Frank tumor keratinization and keratin pearls usually predict no association with either HPV-mediated carcinogenesis or p16 overexpression. In the event that a keratinizing phenotype does demonstrate p16 overexpression, it should be staged in this chapter.