Overexpression is documented and the histology is consistent with HPV-mediated carcinogenesis. These metastatic carcinomas are invariably cystic and include the other findings enumerated above (Fig. 10.4). "Normalization" or maturation of metastatic squamous carcinoma to the point of mimicking a benign cyst is a well-recognized phenomenon; thus the diagnosis of "malignant transformation of a branchial cleft cyst" should be rejected. In these cases, additional viral in situ hybridization studies (HR-HPV, EBER) are recommended. Ciliated squamous carcinoma cells have been observed within both cystic primary and metastatic HPV-mediated cancers, which may also cause diagnostic confusion.10

Finally, there is the potential for confusing nonaggressive pattern of tumor invasion with noninvasive carcinoma. The epithelial crypts of Waldeyer's ring are lined by specialized reticulated epithelium, which is thinner than stratified squamous epithelium and characterized by abundant intraepithelial lymphocytes and mononuclear cells. The basement membrane in this region is composed of fine, discontinuous fibers, thus enabling lymphocyte trafficking.11,12 Because of the lack of a complete, well-defined basement membrane, the idea of in situ carcinoma within these crypts is incorrect. HPV-mediated oropharyngeal carcinoma most often reveals a nonaggressive pattern of invasion (e.g., transitional pattern, which is reminiscent of urinary bladder carcinoma). The smooth, ribbon-like contours of this pattern plus the lack of desmoplastic response might lead the pathologist toward a mistaken diagnosis of in situ carcinoma (Fig. 10.4).