Complete resection of the primary site and/or regional nodal dissections, followed by pathological examination of the resected specimen(s), allows the use of this designation for pT and/or pN, respectively. Specimens that are resected after radiation or chemotherapy need to be identified and considered in context, and use yp instead of p. pT is derived from the actual measurement of the unfixed tumor in the surgical specimen. It should be noted, however, that up to 30% shrinkage of soft tissues may occur in the resected specimen after formalin fixation. Pathological staging represents additional and important information and should be included as such in staging, but it does not supplant clinical staging as the primary staging scheme.  

For pN, a selective neck dissection will ordinarily include 10 or more lymph nodes, and a radical or modified radical neck dissection will ordinarily include 15 or more lymph nodes. Negative pathological examination of a smaller number of nodes still mandates a pNO designation. All surgically resected metastatic nodes should be examined for the presence and extent of ENE. The precise definition of ENE has also varied in the literature over the course of time. The College of American Pathologists defines ENE as extension of metastatic tumor, present within the confines of the lymph node, through the lymph node capsule into the surrounding connective tissue, with or without associated stromal reaction.  

ENE detected on histopathologic examination is designated as ENEmi (microscopic ENE ≤2mm) or ENEma (major ENE>2mm). Both ENEmi and ENEma qualify as ENE(+) for definition of pN. These descriptors of ENE will not be required for current pN definition, but data collection is recommended to allow standardization of data collection and future analysis.#### p16 Immunotesting  

Testing for p16 is mandatory for all oropharyngeal squamous carcinomas but not for hypopharyngeal cancers. If p16 testing is not performed, that case is staged according to this system for p16- cancers. AJCC Level of Evidence: II