Provide a description or map of the regional lymph nodes and node groups that the cancer affects. Unambiguous evidence of gross ENE (i.e., defined as invasion of skin, infiltration of musculature/fixation to adjacent structures on clinical examination, cranial nerve, brachial plexus, sympathetic trunk or phrenic nerve invasion with dysfunction) is a sufficiently high threshold to classify these as clinical ENE(+). Examinations for distant metastases include appropriate imaging, blood chemistries, blood count, and other routine studies as indicated. Biopsy is typically needed to confirm metastasis, although a risk-to-benefit ratio is always weighed and is included in clinical stage as pM1 if done. Imaging studies showing amorphous spiculated margins of involved nodes or involvement of internodal fat resulting in loss of normal oval-to-round nodal shape strongly suggest extracapsular (extranodal) tumor spread. No imaging study (as yet) can identify microscopic foci in regional nodes or distinguish between small reactive nodes and small malignant nodes without central radiographic inhomogeneity.

##### Imaging
Imaging is beneficial for lesions that cannot be fully assessed on clinical examination, locally advanced disease, or symptomatic patients. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging are complementary imaging studies for staging patients with cancers involving the nasal cavity and/or the paranasal sinuses. There is no indication for plain films or positron emission tomography (PET)-CT for staging of the primary site.

PET-CT may be helpful for assessing nodal metastases; however, lymph node staging is discussed in Chapter 6. CT is superior to MR imaging for identifying bone erosion of thin walls and septa of the paranasal sinuses. CT is superior to MR imaging for identifying involvement of the hard palate. Either CT or MR imaging may be performed for tumor extending outside of the nose and/or paranasal sinuses to involve the adjacent structures, including the orbital apex (T4b). MR imaging, especially with T2-weighted images, is helpful for tumor mapping and for distinguishing between tumor extension and obstructed secretions.