The most common sites of distant spread are in the lungs and bones; hepatic and brain metastases occur less often. Mediastinal lymph node metastases are considered distant metastases, except level VII lymph nodes (anterior superior mediastinal lymph nodes cephalad to the innominate artery). No large database registry systems have collected data with sufficient validation on ENE to demonstrate long-term survival. However, abundant data support its adverse prognostic effect.7 The inclusion of ENE in defining the N category based on these data will allow future validation and modification as necessary.

Anatomic sites and histologic types for Head and Neck cancers are coded according to the 3rd Edition of the International Classification of Diseases for Oncology (ICD-O-3). The subsites included in each analysis were chosen on the basis of those listed in the AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, 5th Edition (5th Edition).

Treatment paradigms influence the type and quality of data available for use in prognostication and staging. Cancers that are largely treated using nonsurgical modalities (e.g., nasopharynx) will obviously not have pathological data comparable to cancers that are treated surgically (e.g., oral cavity cancer). Therefore, in these disease sites, parameters that require pathological examination, such as number of involved lymph nodes or microscopic ENE, cannot be evaluated in a significant proportion of patients with head and neck cancer.

Oral cavity cancer represents the most common situation for which histopathologic data are commonly available for relatively large numbers of patients and, therefore, is the one anatomic site that has undergone significant revisions in T category. Additionally, the N categorization for all sites was heavily influenced by the data from oral cavity cancer. Oral cavity cancer outcomes were analyzed using a large data set of patients treated at two tertiary cancer care centers in North America comprising patients treated with a common staging and treatment strategy (Table 5.3). Comparable cancer registry data sets on oral cancer are not available, so these revisions based on single institutional data have not yet been validated on large populations. The following description of the process of stage revision of oral cancer vividly illustrates the importance of high-fidelity data collection and the need for comparable cancer registry data for future iterations of the staging system.

The T criteria for oral cancer patients were modified based on the DOI of the primary tumor, which has long been recognized as an important predictor of outcome. The basis for this modification is the report from the International Consortium for Outcomes Research in Head and Neck Cancer. Outcomes based on the revised T criteria are shown in Fig. 5.2 and Table 5.4.

The N category criteria also were revised for the 8th Edition to incorporate the influence of ENE on prognosis. The preliminary analysis of the influence of ENE on prognosis was performed on a data set from the National Cancer Data Base (NCDB) that included patients treated in 2010-2011. The data on ENE from other sites also have been published widely in institutional data sets and support inclusion in the 8th Edition.